--- PAGE 22 ---

Beyond the limit 
1 
The limits of thought 
Finitude is a basic fact of human existence. Whether one treats this as a source 
of sorrow or of relief, it is without doubt that there are limits to whatever 
people want to do, be they limits of human endurance, resources, or of life 
itself. What these limits are, we can sometimes only speculate; but that they are 
there, we know. For example, we can only guess what the limit time for 
running a mile is; but we know that there is a limit, set by the velocity of 
light, if not by many more mundane things. 
This book is about a certain kind of limit; not the limits of physical endea-
vours like running a mile, but the limits of the mind. I will call them limits of 
thought, though 'thought', here, should be understood in its objective, 
Fregean, sense, as concerning the contents of our intensional states, not our 
subjective consciousness. 1 One might also describe them as conceptual limits, 
since they concern the limits of our concepts. Whatever one calls them, by the 
end of the book I will have given a precise structural characterisation of the 
limits in question, in the shape of the lnclosure Schema. For the present, some 
examples will suffice to indicate what I have in mind: the limit of what can be 
expressed; the limit of what can be described or conceived; the limit of what 
can be known; the limit of iteration of some operation or other, the infinite in 
its mathematical sense. 
Limits of this kind provide boundaries beyond which certain conceptual 
processes (describing, knowing, iterating, etc.) cannot go; a sort of conceptual 
ne plus ultra. The thesis of the book is that such limits are dialetheic; that is, 
that they are the subject, or locus, of true contradictions. The contradiction, in 
each case, is simply to the effect that the conceptual processes in question do 
cross these boundaries. Thus, the limits of thought are boundaries which 
cannot be crossed, but yet which are crossed. 
In each of the cases, there is a totality (of all things expressible, describ-
able, etc.) and an appropriate operation that generates an object that is both 
1 Peter Slezak has suggested to me that there may be an important connection between the 
phenomena that will concern us and subjective consciousness too. See Slezak (1983).

--- PAGE 23 ---

4 
Introduction 
within and without the totality. I will call these situations Closure and 
Transcendence, respectively. In general, the arguments both for Closure and 
for Transcendence use some form of self-reference, a method that is both 
venerable and powerful.2 Closure is usually established by reflecting on the 
conceptual practice in question. In a polemical context this can appear as an 
ad hominem argument. Arguments for Transcendence are of more varied 
kinds; often they involve applying a theory to itself. Some of them are 
more technical; a paradigm of these is diagonalisation, a technique familiar 
from the logical paradoxes. This construction is precisely a boundary-tearing 
heuristic which, given any boundary of a suitable kind, can be applied to 
violate it. 
2 
Dialetheism 
That a contradiction might be true, or that dialetheism (the view that there 
are true contradictions) makes sense, may still be abhorrent, and even threa-
tening, to many contemporary English-speaking philosophers. More likely 
than not, even the suggestion of it will be met with a look of blank incom-
prehension. How could a contradiction be true? After all, orthodox logic 
assures us that for every statement, a, only one of a and -.a is true. The 
simple answer is that orthodox logic, however well entrenched, is just a 
theory of how logical particles, like negation, work; and there is no a priori 
guarantee that it is correct. 3 
Given two states of affairs, there are, in general, four possibilities: one but 
not the other holds, vice versa, both or neither. In particular, given the 
states of affairs a is true and a is false, there are, without begging any 
questions, those four possibilities. The standard logical theory just assumes 
that only two of them should be allowed for. Slightly more liberal views 
allow that a third may arise, the neither case. If nothing else, symmetry 
suggests that the fourth should be countenanced. Suppose, then, that we 
allow sentences to take as semantic values one of the corresponding four 
subsets of the set {true, false}. How do the truth (and falsity) conditions for, 
for example, negation and conjunction now work? Exactly as you would 
expect. -.a is true iff a is false, and vice versa. Similarly, a/\ f3 is true iff 
both conjuncts are true, and false if at least one conjunct is false. In parti-
2 Arguably, it is more than that: it characterises philosophy itself. See Priest (199la). 
3 Thus, when Quine ((1970), p. 81) complains that someone who maintains that a contra-
diction might be true just does not know what they arc talking about, this is exactly analogous to a 
Newtonian physicist complaining that someone who holds that time might run at different rates 
in different frames of reference just does not know what they are talking about. For further 
discussion, see Priest (1987), ch. 14.

--- PAGE 24 ---

Introduction 
5 
cular, if a is both true and false, so is -.a, and so is a/\ -.a. Hence, a 
contradiction can be true (if false as well).4 
Since a logical theory of this kind is so easy to construct, it is worth asking 
why dialetheism should be so outrageous to the sensibility of modern philo-
sophers. The answer is, I am afraid, sociological rather than rational. Until 
Aristotle, the idea that a contradiction might be true was a highly contested 
one. 5 Aristotle went to great lengths to argue against the idea in book 4 of the 
Metaphysics. 6 Because of Aristotle's magisterial authority in the Middle Ages, 
the subject became closed; and, unlike most other subjects on which Aristotle 
pronounced, was not substantially reopened subsequently - at least until 
recently. Few philosophers (with the notable exception of Hegel and some 
of his intellectual descendants) challenged Aristotle. And I know of no histor-
ical defence of the law of non-contradiction since Aristotle worth mentioning. 
Is this because Aristotle's arguments were conclusive? Hardly. Arguably, they 
do not work at all. But even if they were ultimately correct, they could not 
close debate on the issue: his major argument is so tortured that it is hard to 
tell what it is, and the others are little more than throw-away remarks.7 
So what other arguments are there? Apart from an appeal to the received 
logical theory, which we have already seen simply to beg the question, the most 
common is that a contradiction cannot be true since contradictions entail 
everything, and not everything is true. This argument is no better than an 
appeal to the received semantics. Granted, not everything is true; but on the 
alternative semantics sketched above, as should be clear, the argument from 
a/\ -.a to an arbitrary f3 need not preserve truth, and so is not valid.8 More 
subtle arguments are to the effect that some crucial notion or other, for 
example, truth, validity, or rationality, requires consistency. I shall not take 
up these issues here. All that it is necessary to note is that these arguments, 
whatever they are, are neither obvious nor obviously correct. It is thus foolish 
to close one's mind to the possibility of dialetheism. 
I certainly do not intend to imply that these arguments should not be 
discussed: they raise profound issues at the very heart of logic. I have dis-
cussed them in In Contradiction ( 1987), which contains a defence of dialethe-
4 Semantics of this kind can easily be made rigorous. Details can be found in section 1 of the 
technical appendix to Part 3 of the book. There, I ignore the neither case, for reasons given in 
Priest (1987), 4.7. 
5 See, for example, Dancy (1975), ch. 3. 
6 In the same book, he argues against the possibility of a statement being neither true nor false, 
though in other places, for example, ch. 9 of De lnterpretatione, he appears to show a good deal 
more sympathy with that idea. 
7 The arguments are described, analysed and rejected in Lukasiewicz (1971) and Dancy 
(1975). 
8 Similarly, the form of inference usually called the disjunctive syllogism (a, ~a V f3 f- {3) is 
invalid. Let a be both true and false, and f3 just plain false. Then the premises of the syllogism are 
true (since a disjunction is true iff one disjunct is) but the conclusion is not.

--- PAGE 25 ---

6 
Introduction 
ism, and to which I would refer readers for further details. In a sense, In 
Contradiction starts where Part 3 of this book leaves off: with dialetheism and 
the paradoxes of self-reference. Perhaps more importantly, the current inves-
tigations are an application of the main thesis of that book to one particular 
area, a more detailed investigation of one region of the transconsistent. 
3 
The history of limits 
The relationship between the limits of thought and contradiction might be 
described as a vein that runs prominently through the history of Western 
philosophy - except that it is more like a major artery.9 I have therefore 
chosen to structure this book as a series of case-studies on aspects of the 
thought of various historical philosophers. 10 If a philosopher does not appear 
in these pages I certainly do not intend to imply that the limits of thought do 
not play some role in their work. Historians of ideas soon learn - to their 
dismay - that their subject appears to be mathematically dense: between any 
two people who wrote on the matter there appears to be another. Thus, some 
selection must be made. I have chosen those philosophers who have made 
contributions to the matter, in the form of interesting ideas and arguments. 
Whether this interest is objective or merely subjective, I leave the reader to 
judge. 
Although the material in the book is heavily historical, the book is not 
primarily an historical one. My interest throughout is in the substantial thesis 
concerning the dialetheic nature of limits of thought; the historical material is a 
vehicle for this. For this reason, and because I do not want the wood to be 
missed for the trees, I have not attempted discussions that an historian of 
philosophy might consider balanced. If I have tipped the scales in my favour, 
I ask that this be forgiven in the context. The fact that all of the interpretations 
fit neatly into a grander scheme says something in favour of each; and I hope 
that my interpretations of some of the philosophers involved are interesting in 
their own right. 
4 
The structure of the book 
In Part 1 of the book, we will look at a number of pre-Kantian philosophers in 
whose work the limits of thought figure. Contradiction appears at various 
places in these works, though often below the surface. These philosophers 
9 I suspect that the same is true of Eastern philosophy too, though my knowledge of this is 
very limited. 
10 This requires a good deal of quoting. All italics in quotations are original unless otherwise 
specified. In accordance with Cambridge University Press house style, any ellipses at the begin-
ning or end of a quotation have been omitted.

--- PAGE 26 ---

Introduction 
7 
had intimations of the contradictory nature of the limits, and lay the ground 
for those who came later. Part 2 looks at the classic texts of Kant and Hegel. 
Between them, these two writers provide the first clean recognition (though in 
Kant's case, a rather grudging one) and theorisation of the situation. Their 
understanding was of an informal kind, however. A formal articulation of the 
structure involved was realised in subsequent discussions of the paradoxes of 
self-reference. Part 3 turns to this. In it, we will obtain a precise formal 
articulation of the phenomenon that concerns us. In Part 4 we turn to the 
philosophy of language. Many of the traditional problems of philosophy have 
found their modern formulations as problems about language; the one with 
which we are concerned is no different. In this part of the book, we will look at 
the realisation of the phenomenon in that area. 
As will be evident, the case-studies we will cover in the book appear roughly 
in chronological order. One important thing that we will see as we go along is 
the emergence of a notable historical pattern. This may not be obvious in the 
initial parts of the book: it may appear that I am dealing with a number of 
disparate and unconnected phenomena. But, like the events in a detective 
story, they will all fall into place by the end. If the material strikes the reader 
as lacking unity at the start, I would just ask for a little patience. 
It should be said straight away that most of the philosophers I discuss in the 
book would not have seen their work in terms of the pattern I have painted. 
Indeed, the thought that a contradiction might be true would have been 
anathema to most of them. However, a fuller understanding of philosophies, 
like that of people, can often be obtained in the light of what has been 
repressed. This is why an examination of the pertinent aspects of the work 
of these philosophers in the context of a self-conscious dialetheism is, I think, 
illuminating. 
The most notable exception to the historical repression of contradiction is 
Hegel. He, above all philosophers, understood the dialetheic nature of the 
limits of thought, though his frustratingly obscure literary style may well 
cloak this fact from the casual reader (if any reader of Hegel could be described 
as casual). The chapter on Hegel is therefore the lynch-pin of the book. Like 
the vertex of a light cone, it focuses all the rays of thought that come before, as 
well as all those that come after. 
5 
... and the role of logic in it 
Throughout the book I make use of the language of modern logic where this is 
appropriate. In the third part of the book, this is entirely unavoidable. Despite 
this, I hope that the book - or its main import, anyway - will be intelligible to 
people who know little logic. A first course should suffice. Even in the third 
part of the book I have tried to explain technical notions in such a way that 
they are intelligible to readers who are not logicians, provided only that they

--- PAGE 27 ---

8 
Introduction 
are prepared to take the material slowly. And the detailed arguments in this 
part of the book can usually be skipped without doing too much damage to the 
reader's understanding of the main points. 
The logical notation I use throughout is entirely standard (or one of the 
standard onesll). Any non-standard notation is explained where it is intro-
duced (though non-logicians might like to note that 'iff' is an abbreviation for 
'if and only if'). A word should be said about the conditional, ---+,however. I 
intend the issues in this book to be independent of theories of conditionality, in 
as far as this is possible. Hence I shall use the arrow as a generic conditional. 
Where the argument turns on some quite specific feature of the conditional, I 
shall usually comment on this fact. 
The book, then, is a blend of logic and the history of philosophy. If it be an 
unusual blend, I trust it may still be a fruitful one. I hope that it gives all who 
read it a little of the pleasure it has given me to write it. Naturally, I would like 
to persuade the reader both that the limits of thought are dialetheic and that 
the application of this thesis illuminates the history of certain central aspects of 
philosophy. But even if the book does not do this, I hope that it will at least 
cause the reader to transcend the limits of their own thoughts, forcing them to 
go where no thought (or anyway, no thought of theirs) has gone before. 
11 Specifically, it is that of (for example) Bell and Machover (1977), sections 4, 5.

--- PAGE 28 ---

Part 1 
The limits of thought 1n pre-Kantian 
philosophy 
It would, I think, be enough to destroy any ... positive idea of the infi-
nite to ask him that has it, whether he could add to it or no. 
John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding

--- PAGE 30 ---

1 The limits of expression 
Introduction 
Four limits of thought in particular will concern us in the book: the limits of 
the expressible, the limits of the iterable (the mathematical infinite), the limits 
of cognition, and the limits of conception. There is, as we shall see in due 
course, a close connection between these things. However, no one before Kant 
perceived this clearly. In the first part of the book we will look at ways that 
these various limits arose in pre-Kantian philosophy. This will involve us in 
looking at a number of topics that may appear, initially, to have little to do with 
each other. As I said in the Introduction of the book, if this is so, patience will, 
I hope, be rewarded. 
The first limit we will be concerned with here is the limit of the expressible, 
which is, perhaps, the most fundamental of the limits that will occupy us in the 
book. One might suppose, for a number of reasons, that features of the (non-
linguistic) world are such as to transcend the ability of language to express 
them. If this is indeed so, then attempts to say what these are, are liable to end 
up in contradiction. For in saying what those features are, one is liable to say 
the unsayable. 
In this chapter we will look at three reasons for supposing there to be 
features of the world that transcend language. Good candidates for features 
of the world that are liable to fall into this category are ones that might be 
thought to constitute ultimate reality, in some sense; for example, fundamental 
matter or God. We will look at an account of each of these two things that 
places it in the category of the inexpressible: Aristotle's account of prime 
matter, and Cusanus' account of God. First, however, we will start with a 
much more radical reason for the existence of the inexpressible; one that, if it 
were correct, would show that the whole of reality is like this: Cratylus' view of 
the flux of meaning. 
1.1 
The flux 
Cratylus was a philosopher of the fifth century BC, a rough contemporary of 
Socrates, and a follower of the philosopher Heraclitus. Heraclitus held,

--- PAGE 31 ---

12 
The limits of thought in pre-Kantian philosophy 
famously, that everything is in a state of change or flux. 1 What, exactly, he 
meant by this is somewhat moot, but we may distinguish a weaker and a 
stronger interpretation. For something to be in a state of change it is arguably 
necessary and sufficient for it to be in the process of losing some of its proper-
ties. The weaker interpretation is simply that everything is changing in this 
sense. A much stronger interpretation is that everything is losing all of its 
properties. After all, if everything is changing, then the fact that x is P is 
changing. Whatever the historical Heraclitus held (and there is no particular 
reason to suppose that he held the strong form of the doctrine2), Cratylus 
himself held the strong form. 
The weak form of the doctrine is a very plausible one, at least if we 
restrict ourselves to the material world. Given that there are two things in 
the cosmos that are in motion with respect to each other (which seems 
beyond doubt), then it follows that everything is in motion with respect to 
at least one thing. Hence, everything is changing its position with respect to 
something, and so is changing one of its properties. The stronger form 
appears less plausible. Australia, for example, is in the Southern hemisphere; 
it was yesterday, and will be tomorrow. Here, then, is a property of Australia 
that is not changing. Of course, Australia is in a process of continental drift, 
and this may have taken it into the Southern hemisphere, and may one day 
take it out. But this is hardly to say that this property is changing now. 
There is a possible reply here, however. If we are thinking not in terms of 
days and weeks, but in terms of geological epochs, then it becomes much 
more natural to say that Australia's being in the Southern hemisphere is now 
(in this epoch) changing. Thus, with more generous time spans, the stronger 
thesis becomes more plausible. 
In due course the question of whether the meanings of words and sentences 
are changing will arise. Whilst it can hardly be maintained that the meanings of 
words change overnight, it certainly does seem to be true that they are chan-
ging, provided we concern ourselves with a sufficiently generous time span. 
Over hundreds of years most words change their usages and hence their 
meanings. Meanings, too, are therefore subject to the stronger version of 
Heraclitus' thesis. 
1.2 
Plato against Cratylus 
Cratylus' strong version of the doctrine of flux was attacked by Plato. This is 
primarily in the Theaetetus, 18lb-183c. The relevant part of the argument goes 
1 See Barnes ( 1979), ch. 4. 
2 Ibid., p. 69.
